Hello everyone. Welcome. My name is Jeroen Janssens and today I'm going to talk about how you can combine R and Python.
In order to get the job done, you need to, you know, resort to other languages, however
strange they may be. And the same is for data science, right? There might be situations
where you need to make combinations of tools or languages out there. So, for example, you
may have written a Python application that needs to use an algorithm that's only available
inside an R package. Or maybe you've done your analysis in R which needs to be part
of a larger ETL pipeline written in Python. So, what do you do in those situations? Well,
you take a polyglot approach. So, I've had a few of those situations over the past few
years and I want to share some stories with you today. Now, this won't be a very technical
talk, because I think the main challenge is not going to be the code that you need to
write, but your mindset. The way you're going to handle this. Your way of thinking. I really
believe that if you want to be effective as a data scientist, you need to be able to recognize
when it's okay to use the same language for the entire project or when it's better to
get in the help of some other tool or language. So, who here uses R or Python? Show of hands.
R or Python? Not that many. R or Python? All right. That's okay. If you're watching this
on YouTube, almost everybody raised their hands. Keep your hands raised. Who here is
using SQL? Congratulations. You are already a polyglot data scientist. Perhaps without
even being aware of this. So, there are, of course, many other languages and tools available,
but in this talk, I'm going to focus on just R and Python. And rest assured, I'm not suggesting
that you should transition from R to Python. Although I realize, I've heard that, you know,
there are plenty of people in a situation at the place that they work that they do need
to transition. But I really see this as a spectrum. Right? It's not R or Python. You
can combine these two beautiful languages in multiple ways. And which one is best depends
entirely on your situation. Okay. Story time. About 13 years ago, I started working as a
data scientist at a startup in New York City. I was the first data scientist, and all the
engineers there were using Python. So, I'm like, all right. I got this. We've got pandas.
We've got notebooks. Oh, my. I don't want to visualize my data using Matplotlib. I had
seen what ggplot2 could do. So, what did I do? I took a polyglot approach. So, the solution
conceptually looks like this. Right? And try to think if you have had a similar situation
in the past that you where this might have been appropriate or maybe there is something
currently going on. I don't know. But in my specific situation, I there was some IPython
magic that I could use that uses the package rpy2 under the hood. So, if you're in a similar
situation, then I could recommend rpy2. Now, in this particular case, it was fine because
I was the only data scientist doing this. Yeah? And for data visualization specifically,
as we have seen in the previous presentation as well, there is now the wonderful plot9
package, a Python port of ggplot2. And speaking of which, Posit is currently organizing a
contest for plot9 as well as a table contest. So, if you're into, you know, visualizing
data or creating tables, I recommend that you participate. So, it could be a nice excuse
to try out that other language. So, the deadline is October 3rd for these two contests. And
if you search for 2025 plot9 contest, then you'll get to see the announcement and you
can see more details.
All right. Story time. I was working at a Dutch telecommunications company in the Netherlands
at a team that only used R. All right. Fantastic. I used the tidyverse and ggplot2 still and
I did some fancy dimensionality reduction and I created, you know, a machine learning
model. I was asked to create a machine learning model that would then be used on their website.
Yeah. So, I had this nicely wrapped up and it was all good to go. So, when I then spoke
to the team responsible for serving these models, right, would be an API kind of situation,
they were like, yeah, we don't do that here. We only use Python. So, luckily, I used annoy,
which is a C++ library for doing approximate nearest neighbor search. So, I realize that's
really specific. But this particular package had both language bindings in R and Python
available. So, what I could do is what I like to call the save and load approach. It doesn't
have to be that complicated. You can save intermediate results, right, say to disk or
to a database and let some other process read this. Right? It doesn't have to be fancy.
This might work. And it also doesn't have to be, you know, in our situation we had multiple
processes reading from this database. But, you know, it could be a single one and those
languages could be flipped. So, this approach is very flexible. But keep in mind that you
may need additional coordination, right, so that you ensure that both sides of the database
or disk are being run at the correct times. So, the polyglot approach is nothing new.
Yeah? So, the ability to easily combine multiple tools and languages has been around for over
50 years. 50 years. When the Unix command line got its pipe operator. So, this is not
so much a single story. But over the past 15 years, this has become more a way of working
for me. And the idea here is that the pipe operator connects the standard output stream
of the first tool to the standard input stream of the second tool. Right? There's no saving
to disk. Now, keep in mind that according to the Unix philosophy, text is the universal
interface. So, if you have to write and read, you know, a data frame, that will most likely
be CSV. And so that's something to keep in mind. Now, you can send binary data over the
pipe, but then you wouldn't be playing nice with the gazillion other tools out there.
And again, this approach works for any language. Yeah? And you can make that chain as long
as you want. But hey, it's not for everybody. I realize that. But if you do want to give
this a go, I can you might enjoy this book I wrote a couple of years ago. It's available
for free online. Now, the last story that I want to share with
you is more a cautionary tale. So, I was once again working at a Dutch company. This time
a utilities company. And they had a huge ETL pipeline, so to speak, set up. It started
off as some R code, and then later on they added some Python and some copying and RPy2.
But eventually it became a process that took over 700 gigabytes of RAM on a single machine
to run. I believe it took over two days to finish. And that was okay, because these calculations
only needed to be done twice a year. They were needed to make predictions about the
utility grid and how much power was going over them so that they could make choices
on where to reinforce the network, add additional transformers. So, pretty important stuff.
But then management came down to us and they said, all right, so instead of doing this
for 10% of our network, why don't you do this for everything that we have? And instead
of doing this twice a year, why don't you do this every week? Oh, yeah, your budget
is 5,000 euros a month. So, we had a real problem here. We had the reverse problem,
because using both Python and R was really hurting our performance. It also made our
virtual machines, our Docker images way too large and it was very difficult to maintain.
So, we needed to convince the rest of the team that we actually needed a monoglot approach.
So, we were successful in the end. We suggested, okay, let's use Polars. Mind you, this is
almost three years ago, before Polars was cool. But we were really excited. I mean,
in the end, it was a big success. Everything was rewritten to Python and Polars and it
all worked out. But it was a big investment. So, my colleague and I, we learned so much
about Polars. We were so excited about it that we decided to write a book about this
at the same time. Now, on this website, you can find more information and get the first
chapter for free. Right? And for five bucks, I can send you the PDF. All right. So, now,
so just to keep in mind that everything that you add, every dependency, and, yeah, also
for packages and tools for entire languages, everything that you add, of course, adds complexity
to this. Yeah? And space. Not only in memory, but also on disk. Right? Adds time. It's
usually not, depending on what you want to do, it usually takes longer if you want to
combine languages. Unless you decide, all right, we've got to rewrite this part in
Fortran, but that's another talk. Yeah? And, of course, risk. So, I hear some of you thinking,
what about Python within R? Yeah? And I have to be honest here. I haven't had a situation
yet where I needed to do this. But if you do, then I can definitely recommend that you
check out Reticulate and Arrow. Right? Reticulate for running Python code in R and Arrow for
zero copy data sharing. Yeah? And I also want to give a shout out to Positron
and Quarto. Two tools that make it particularly convenient and pleasant to work with these
two languages. Positron as an IDE and Quarto as a format. So, I hope that through these
stories I've been able to convince you that there are definitely situations where it's
worthwhile to embrace a polyglot approach. Yeah? You know, it takes time and skill to
sort of recognize when this is appropriate and which approach is the right one, which
tools should I use. But I shouldn't stop you from, you know, clinging on to doing everything
in the same language. How beautiful that language may be. Like Dutch.
So, all right. So, yeah. I've shared with you through my stories a couple of these approaches
and tools, Rpy2, Reticulate, Arrow, saving and loading. Right? So, whatever you do, be
mindful of the complexity that you're adding. Space, time, risk. Right? It may be more pragmatic.
It may get the job done. But, yeah, I think if you take all that into account, then you'll
be good. Thank you very much.
Okay. We have a few minutes. So, send your questions in. Let's see. One, managing versions
in each language takes work. Is it twice as bad or more when using both?
It's more than twice as bad. Yeah. Well, I mean, it depends on how coupled the two processes
will be. Right? If you're using Reticulate and Rpy2, there's a really tight connection
between the two. Again, if you're using the other two approaches, like using piping or
the save and load approach, right, where you have, say, a hard disk or a database in between,
you decouple that and it's exactly twice as bad.
Okay. Another question. Could you explain a little bit more about how rewriting your
R plus Python code with Polars helps speed things up? Could you have used Arrow?
Yeah. So, Polars uses Arrow and then some changes. But, yeah, it uses an in-columnar
or an in-memory columnar data frame format. So, yeah. Yeah. Arrow. Good stuff. Parquet.
Right? These kind of things. Okay. How do you determine when it's worth exploring
doing something in another language if you can already do it in your primary language?
Yeah. So, I think you'll recognize when there's a problem. Right? You shouldn't just add another
language just for the sake of it. But if you're like, maybe you work at a consultancy firm
and you're asked to do something now in a different language and you're like, oh, man,
I wish I just had that algorithm that I use in that other language. Then, of course, then
you're feeling it. Then you're feeling, okay, there is now a situation. Wait a minute. I
remember what this Dutch guy was saying. I should use a polyglot approach. So, but if
there is no problem, then I don't see any reason why you should not stick to the same
language. Okay. One more. What is something that R is missing for Python and something
Python is missing from R? Well, as we've seen in the previous talk, I mean, there are, the
two languages are, there are quite some fundamental differences between the two. Right? With R,
you've all been spoiled with the tidyverse and non-standard evaluation and the pipe operator.
Right? Those are things that aren't easily done in Python. So, yeah. I mean, I think
that's about it. I was really hoping for an applause there. I don't know. But the tidyverse.
All right. Thank you.